### Capstone-Report
## Problem: 
In mammals, neural development is highly sensitive to the fetal-maternal environment. For example, prenatal exposure of the brain to excess glucocorticoids, through maternal stress or exogenous administration of synthetic glucocorticoids (sGC) has been shown to have deleterious effects on development and function that persist in adolescence and adulthood [1-3]. Glucocorticoids are a class of steroid hormone which provide developmental triggers during gestation [4]. During gestation, there is a natural surge of glucocorticoids which occurs 10-15 days before delivery in most mammalian species. This surge is essential for normal maturation of multiple organ systems including the thyroid, kidney, lungs, and brain [5]. Mothers that are at risk for preterm labor, however, are administered a dose of sGC to reduce the incidence of respiratory distress syndrome in the fetus. The effects of sGC on the developing brain have yet to be fully elucidated, while recent evidence suggests that multiple courses of sGC have lasting behavioral effects in children exposed in utero that were subsequently born at term [3]. The hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN) plays a central-role in regulating stress response and behavior, as well as energy homeostasis. In this research, we investigate the effects of multiple courses of sGC exposure on the gene expression profiles of the PVN of juvenile female offspring. Furthermore, we employ predictive modelling techniques to further understand the relationship between gene expression and the behavioral profiles observed in these animals.  

## Methods: 
Pregnant guinea pigs received 3 courses of betamethasone (Beta;1mg/kg) or saline (C) in late gestation. Total locomotor activity in open-field (OFA) was measured in female offspring on postnatal day 24 and brains collected at day 40. PVN was micro-punched (C;n=5, Beta;n=5) and RNA was extracted. mRNA library preparation was performed using Illumina TruSeq V2 mRNA enrichment using standard protocols. High-throughput sequencing were performed on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 sequencing system using standard run, following the protocol recommended by Illumina for sequencing mRNA samples. Sequencing was done for each biological replicate at 1 × 51 bp by the Donnelly Centre for Cellular and Biomolecular Research. Sequence reads were aligned to the Cavia porcellus reference genome (cavPor3.83) with Tuxedo Suit tools [6] accessed through The Galaxy Project [7]. Sequencing depth for RNA-seq samples averaged 45 million reads per biological sample with >85% overall alignment rate. Subsequent analyses were performed in R (version 3.2.3). Gene read counts were determined with Genomic Alignments (version 1.6.3) as described by the authors [8]. Outliers were removed using Cook’s distance with default cutoffs [9], and data were normalized by residuals with RUVSeq (version 1.4.0) [10]. Differential gene expression was assessed using EdgeR’s (version 3.12.1) [11, 12] general linear model likelihood ratio test and FDR-corrected p < 0.05 was considered significant. Principal component analysis (PCA) was carried out on normalized expression profiles of significantly up-regulated genes, and OFA scores and displayed on a circle of correlations. Relationships were analyzed by linear regression. Multiple regression combined gene profiles to predict OFA, linear regression determined the correlation of predicted and observed OFA.

## Limitations:
Due to the high dimensionality of the data set, paired with the low number of samples, there is a propensity for any model to over-fit the data. This is a major concern as this would indicate that the results observed from these analyses would not generalize to future data sets. Although Leave One Out cross validation was employed to determine whether the model was over-fit, the results from this statistical tool do not demonstrate with high certainty that the model is not over-fit. The best way to truly validate the model will be to generate a novel data set upon which to test the model’s accuracy. 
